lib/ramfs: Add README.md file (#705)
unikraft/unikraft: lib/ramfs/README.md

# RamFS: Unikraft’s RAM-based Virtual Filesystem

The `RamFS` filesystem is a virtual filesystem that uses memory for storage, as the name implies.
Its advantage is that it is very fast.
From a simplified perspective, we can look at a file in `RamFS` as a buffer in memory.
Since this is how `RamFS` represents data, the disadvantage becomes apparent: we can only write data into `RamFS` until we fill up all the memory.
Moreover, data is not persistent: once we stop the unikernel, memory is freed and data is lost.

## Key Functions and Data Structures

The key structure used is `ramfs_node` defined as:

```c
struct ramfs_node {
 /* Next node in the same directory */
 struct ramfs_node *rn_next;
 /* First child node */
 struct ramfs_node *rn_child;
 /*
  * Entry type: regular file - VREG, symbolic link - VLNK,
  * or directory - VDIR
  */
 int rn_type;

>  /* Name of the file/directory (NUL-terminated) */

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 /* Name of the file/directory (NULL-terminated) */
```

 char *rn_name;
 /* Length of the name not including the terminator */
 size_t rn_namelen;
 /* Size of the file */
 size_t rn_size;
 /* Buffer to the file data */
 char *rn_buf;
 /* Size of the allocated buffer */
 size_t rn_bufsize;
 /* Last change time */
 struct timespec rn_ctime;
 /* Last access time */
 struct timespec rn_atime;
 /* Last modification time */
 struct timespec rn_mtime;
 /* Node access mode */
 int rn_mode;
 /* Whether the rn_buf was allocated in this ramfs_node */
 bool rn_owns_buf;
};
```

> This structure contains the `rn_type` field, which refers to the entry type (which can be a regular file - `VREG`, a symbolic link - `VLNK`, or a directory - `VDIR`), the buffer in which the data will be stored (the `rn_buf` field), and its size (`rn_size`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This structure contains:

* The `rn_type` field, which refers to the entry type.
It can be a regular file - `VREG`, a symbolic link - `VLNK`, or a directory - `VDIR`
* The  `rn_buf` field, which is the buffer in which the data will be stored
*  The buffer  size, `rn_size`

```
This sounds a little confusing. The meaning of the sentence gets lost because of the long explanation for the `rn_type` field.
I would do this as a list or something similar.

> Typically, an inode-like structure (such as `ramfs_node`) doesn't store the filename;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Typically, an `inode-like` structure (such as `ramfs_node`) doesn't store the filename;
```

> the filename is typically stored in a dentry-like structure, allowing for the creation of hard links.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the filename is typically stored in a `dentry-like` structure, allowing for the creation of hard links.
```

For simplicity, the `RamFS` library stores the filename as the `rn_name` and `rn_namelen` fields in the `ramfs_node` structure;
consequently, this means that hard links are not available on `RamFS`.

## Configuring Applications to Use `RamFS`

An Unikraft application that uses the `RamFS` filesystem will use code snippets such as the one below:

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <fcntl.h>
#include <unistd.h>

int main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
   char buf[1024];
   int fd = open("westworld.txt", O_RDWR | O_CREAT, 0777);

   write(fd, "These violent delights have violent ends.", 41);

   close(fd);
   fd = open("westworld.txt", O_RDONLY);

   read(fd, buf, 41);
   printf("%s\n", buf);

   return 0;
}
```

All the files for `RamFS` are created in the memory of the application, therefore they exist only for the duration of the program.
Moreover, this means that we cannot use existing files from outside the application (e.g. files from the host filesystem).
This is why we have to create the files we want to use inside the application.

> In the snippet above, we gave the `O_CREAT` value to the flag parameter of the `open()` function to create the file named `westworld.txt`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the snippet above, we gave the `O_CREAT` value to the flag parameter of the `open()` function to create a file named `westworld.txt`.
```

To configure the application to run under `RamFS` we follow the steps below:

1. Enter the configuration interface by running:

   ```console
   $ make menuconfig
   ```

1. Select `vfscore:` `VFS Core Interface`.
1. Select `vfscore: Configuration  --->`.
1. Select `Automatically mount a root filesystem (/)`.
1. Select `Default root filesystem`.
1. Select `RamFS`.

Building and running the program above yields the output below:

```console
SeaBIOS (version 1.15.0-1)
Booting from ROM...
Powered by
o.   .o       _ _               __ _
Oo   Oo  ___ (_) | __ __  __ _ ' _) :_
oO   oO ' _ `| | |/ /  _)' _` | |_|  _)
oOo oOO| | | | |   (| | | (_) |  _) :_
 OoOoO ._, ._:_:_,\_._,  .__,_:_, \___)
          Phoebe 0.10.0~9bf6e633-custom
These violent delights have violent ends.
Arguments:  "build/app-helloworld_kvm-x86_64" "console=ttyS0"
Console terminated, terminating guest (PID: 9898)...
```

> As we can see in the snippet above, the text `These violent delights have violent ends.` from the `westworld.txt` file is printed to the standard output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we can see in the snippet above, the phrase `These violent delights have violent ends.` from the `westworld.txt` file is printed to the standard output.
```

> # RamFS: Unikraft’s RAM-based Virtual Filesystem

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# RamFS: Unikraft's RAM-based Virtual Filesystem
```

The `RamFS` filesystem is a virtual filesystem that uses memory for storage, as the name implies.

> Its advantage is that it is very fast.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Its advantage is speed.
```

From a simplified perspective, we can look at a file in `RamFS` as a buffer in memory.
Since this is how `RamFS` represents data, the disadvantage becomes apparent: we can only write data into `RamFS` until we fill up all the memory.

> Moreover, data is not persistent: once we stop the unikernel, memory is freed and data is lost.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Moreover, data is not persistent: once we stop the unikernel, the memory is freed and the data is lost.
```

> Moreover, data is not persistent: once we stop the unikernel, the memory is freed and the data is lost.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since this is how `RamFS` represents data, there are two downsides:

1. Data to write is limited by the total memory size.

1. Data is not persistent: once the unikernel is shutdown, the memory is freed and the data is lost.
```

## Key Functions and Data Structures

The key structure used is `ramfs_node` defined as:

```c
struct ramfs_node {
 /* Next node in the same directory */
 struct ramfs_node *rn_next;

>  /* First child node */

Reviewer 2: Is this `NULL` in case the current `node` is NOT a directory?

 struct ramfs_node *rn_child;
 /*
  * Entry type: regular file - VREG, symbolic link - VLNK,
  * or directory - VDIR
  */
 int rn_type;
 /* Name of the file/directory (NULL-terminated) */
 char *rn_name;
 /* Length of the name not including the terminator */
 size_t rn_namelen;
 /* Size of the file */
 size_t rn_size;
 /* Buffer to the file data */
 char *rn_buf;
 /* Size of the allocated buffer */
 size_t rn_bufsize;
 /* Last change time */
 struct timespec rn_ctime;
 /* Last access time */
 struct timespec rn_atime;
 /* Last modification time */
 struct timespec rn_mtime;
 /* Node access mode */
 int rn_mode;
 /* Whether the rn_buf was allocated in this ramfs_node */
 bool rn_owns_buf;
};
```

This structure contains:

* The `rn_type` field, which refers to the entry type.

> It can be a regular file - `VREG`, a symbolic link - `VLNK`, or a directory - `VDIR`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It can be a regular file - `VREG`, a symbolic link - `VLNK`, or a directory - `VDIR`.
```

* The `rn_buf` field, which is the buffer in which the data will be stored
* The buffer size, `rn_size`

Typically, an `inode-like` structure (such as `ramfs_node`) doesn't store the filename;
the filename is typically stored in a `dentry-like` structure, allowing for the creation of hard links.
For simplicity, the `RamFS` library stores the filename as the `rn_name` and `rn_namelen` fields in the `ramfs_node` structure;
consequently, this means that hard links are not available on `RamFS`.

## Configuring Applications to Use `RamFS`

An Unikraft application that uses the `RamFS` filesystem will use code snippets such as the one below:

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <fcntl.h>
#include <unistd.h>

> int main(int argc, char *argv[])

Reviewer 2: Indent code using TABs.

{
   char buf[1024];

>    int fd = open("westworld.txt", O_RDWR | O_CREAT, 0777);
> 
>    write(fd, "These violent delights have violent ends.", 41);
> 
>    close(fd);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   int fd;
   
   open("westworld.txt", O_RDWR | O_CREAT, 0777);
   write(fd, "These violent delights have violent ends.", 41);
   close(fd);

```

   fd = open("westworld.txt", O_RDONLY);

> 
>    read(fd, buf, 41);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   read(fd, buf, 41);
   close(fd);
```

# RamFS: Unikraft’s RAM-based Virtual Filesystem

> The `RamFS` filesystem is a virtual filesystem that uses memory for storage, as the name implies. Its advantage is that it is very fast. From a simplified perspective, we can look at a file in RamFS as a buffer in memory. Since this is how RamFS represents data, the disadvantage becomes apparent: we can only write data into RamFS until we fill up all the memory.

Reviewer: Please use one sentence per line and one line per sentence.
This goes for the rest of the file as well.

> The `RamFS` filesystem is a virtual filesystem that uses memory for storage, as the name implies. Its advantage is that it is very fast. From a simplified perspective, we can look at a file in RamFS as a buffer in memory. Since this is how RamFS represents data, the disadvantage becomes apparent: we can only write data into RamFS until we fill up all the memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `RamFS` filesystem is a virtual filesystem that uses memory for storage, as the name implies. Its advantage is that it is very fast. From a simplified perspective, we can look at a file in `RamFS` as a buffer in memory. Since this is how `RamFS` represents data, the disadvantage becomes apparent: we can only write data into `RamFS` until we fill up all the memory.
```

## Key Functions and Data Structures

The key structure used is `ramfs_node` defined as:

```c
struct ramfs_node {
	struct ramfs_node *rn_next;   /* next node in the same directory */
	struct ramfs_node *rn_child;  /* first child node */
	int rn_type;    /* file or directory */
	char *rn_name;    /* name (null-terminated) */
	size_t rn_namelen;    /* length of name not including terminator */
	size_t rn_size;    /* file size */
	char *rn_buf;    /* buffer to the file data */
	size_t rn_bufsize;    /* allocated buffer size */
	struct timespec rn_ctime;  /* last change time */
	struct timespec rn_atime; /* last access time */
	struct timespec rn_mtime; /* last modification time */
	int rn_mode; /* node access mode */
	bool rn_owns_buf; /* if the rn_buf has been allocated in this ramfs_node */
};
```

This structure contains the file type, the buffer in which the data will be stored, and its size. A field that normally should not be here is the name, but for the simplicity of the library, it is used. Unfortunately, the fact that the name field is here and is used in the code does not allow the creation of hard links.

> ## Configuring Applications to Use RamFS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Configuring Applications to Use RamFS

```

> We can find RamFS in menuconfig under vfscore: `VFS Core Interface` -> `vfscore: Configuration  --->`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can find `RamFS` in `menuconfig` under `vfscore:` `VFS Core Interface` -> `vfscore: Configuration  --->`.
```

> Then we select `Automatically mount a root filesysytem (/)` and the default file system will be RamFS.

Reviewer: I would also add a short example on running a simple app using a `ramfs` filesystem.

# RamFS: Unikraft’s RAM-based Virtual Filesystem

The `RamFS` filesystem is a virtual filesystem that uses memory for storage, as the name implies.
Its advantage is that it is very fast.
From a simplified perspective, we can look at a file in `RamFS` as a buffer in memory.

> Since this is how `RamFS` represents data, the disadvantage becomes apparent: we can only write data into `RamFS` until we fill up all the memory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since this is how `RamFS` represents data, the disadvantage becomes apparent: we can only write data into `RamFS` until we fill up all the memory.
Moreover, data is not persistent: once we stop the unikernel, memory is freed and data is lost.
```

## Key Functions and Data Structures

The key structure used is `ramfs_node` defined as:

```c
struct ramfs_node {
    /* The next node in the same directory. */
    struct ramfs_node *rn_next;
    /* The first child node. */
    struct ramfs_node *rn_child;
    /* The type: file or directory. */
    int rn_type;
    /* Name of the file/directory (null-terminated). */
    char *rn_name;
    /* The length of the name, not including the terminator. */
    size_t rn_namelen;
    /* The size of the file. */
    size_t rn_size;
    /* Buffer to the file data. */
    char *rn_buf;
    /* The size of the allocated buffer. */
    size_t rn_bufsize;
    /* Last change time. */
    struct timespec rn_ctime;
    /* Last access time. */
    struct timespec rn_atime;
    /* Last modification time. */
    struct timespec rn_mtime;
    /* The node access mode. */
    int rn_mode;
    /* Whether or not the rn_buf was allocated in this ramfs_node. */
    bool rn_owns_buf;
};
```

> This structure contains the file type, the buffer in which the data will be stored, and its size.

Reviewer 2: Detail what are the file types. And what macros / values can be used to specify it.

A field that normally should not be here is the name, but for the simplicity of the library, it is used.
Unfortunately, the fact that the name field is here and is used in the code does not allow the creation of hard links.

## Configuring Applications to Use RamFS

We have the following simple app that we run under `RamFS`:

```c
char buf[1024];
int f = open("test1.txt", O_RDWR | O_CREAT, 0777);

write(f, "TEST", 4);

close(f);
f = open("test1.txt", O_RDONLY);

> read(f, buf, 4);
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
read(f, buf, 4);
```

Author: What is the suggested change here because these two lines are the same?

Reviewer 2: @DeliaPavel , I think it was an extra white space at the end.

```

All the files for `RamFS` are created in the memory of the application, therefore they exist only for the duration of the program.

> This is why we have to create the files we want to use inside the application (in our case, "test1.txt"), and we do this by giving the `O_CREAT` flag to the `read` function.

Reviewer 2: This needs a better wording the make the reader understand that files can't be "imported" from the outside world.

To configure the application to run under `RamFS` we have to do the following in `menuconfig`.
We can find `RamFS` in `menuconfig` under `vfscore:` `VFS Core Interface` -> `vfscore: Configuration  --->`.

> Then we select `Automatically mount a root filesystem (/)` and the default file system will be `RamFS`.

Reviewer 2: Add this as an ordered list of steps.

> After building the application, we can run it like: `./qemu-guest -k build/app-helloworld_kvm-x86_64`.

Reviewer 2: This is specific to KVM. And it also doesn't consider other possible options such as networking support. I would simply remove it.

Since this is how `RamFS` represents data, the disadvantage becomes apparent: we can only write data into `RamFS` until we fill up all the memory.
Moreover, data is not persistent: once we stop the unikernel, memory is freed and data is lost.

## Key Functions and Data Structures

The key structure used is `ramfs_node` defined as:

```c
struct ramfs_node {
    /* Next node in the same directory */
    struct ramfs_node *rn_next;
    /* First child node */
    struct ramfs_node *rn_child;
    /* Type: file or directory */
    int rn_type;
    /* Name of the file/directory (null-terminated) */
    char *rn_name;
    /* Length of the name, not including the terminator */
    size_t rn_namelen;
    /* Size of the file */
    size_t rn_size;
    /* Buffer to the file data */
    char *rn_buf;
    /* Size of the allocated buffer */
    size_t rn_bufsize;
    /* Last change time */
    struct timespec rn_ctime;
    /* Last access time */
    struct timespec rn_atime;
    /* Last modification time */
    struct timespec rn_mtime;
    /* Node access mode */
    int rn_mode;
    /* Whether or not the rn_buf was allocated in this ramfs_node */
    bool rn_owns_buf;
};
```

> This structure contains the file type (which can be a regular file - VREG, a symbolic link - VLNK, or a directory - VDIR), the buffer in which the data will be stored, and its size.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This structure contains the file type (which can be a regular file - `VREG`, a symbolic link - `VLNK`, or a directory - `VDIR`), the buffer in which the data will be stored, and its size.
```

A field that normally should not be here is the name, but for the simplicity of the library, it is used.
Unfortunately, the fact that the name field is here and is used in the code does not allow the creation of hard links.

> ## Configuring Applications to Use RamFS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Configuring Applications to Use `RamFS`
```

> We have the following simple app that we run under `RamFS`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have the following simple app that we run using a `RamFS` filesystem:
```

```c
char buf[1024];
int f = open("test1.txt", O_RDWR | O_CREAT, 0777);

write(f, "TEST", 4);

close(f);
f = open("test1.txt", O_RDONLY);

read(f, buf, 4);

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```

All the files for `RamFS` are created in the memory of the application, therefore they exist only for the duration of the program.

> Moreover, this means that we cannot use existing files from outside the application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Moreover, this means that we cannot use existing files from outside the application (e.g. files from the hosts filesystem).
```

> This is why we have to create the files we want to use inside the application (in our case, "test1.txt"), and we do this by giving the `O_CREAT` flag to the `read` function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is why we have to create the files we want to use inside the application (in our case, `test1.txt`), and we do this by giving the `O_CREAT` flag to the `read` function.
```

> To configure the application to run under `RamFS` we have to do the following in `menuconfig`:`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To configure the application to run under `RamFS` we have to do the following in `menuconfig`:`

```

Reviewer: I would also add the `make menuconfig` step or point to the docs website, the users might not know what `menuconfig` is.

1. Select `vfscore:` `VFS Core Interface`.
1. Select `vfscore: Configuration  --->`.
1. Select `Automatically mount a root filesystem (/)`.
1. Select `Default root filesystem`.

> 1. Select `RamFS`.

Reviewer: Maybe print the buffer in the app example add the output of the application being run.

# RamFS: Unikraft’s RAM-based Virtual Filesystem

The `RamFS` filesystem is a virtual filesystem that uses memory for storage, as the name implies.
Its advantage is that it is very fast.
From a simplified perspective, we can look at a file in `RamFS` as a buffer in memory.
Since this is how `RamFS` represents data, the disadvantage becomes apparent: we can only write data into `RamFS` until we fill up all the memory.
Moreover, data is not persistent: once we stop the unikernel, memory is freed and data is lost.

## Key Functions and Data Structures

The key structure used is `ramfs_node` defined as:

```c
struct ramfs_node {
    /* Next node in the same directory */
    struct ramfs_node *rn_next;
    /* First child node */
    struct ramfs_node *rn_child;

>     /* Type: file or directory */

Reviewer 2: I would add here the possible values: `VREG`, `VLNK`, `VDIR` and their explanation.

    int rn_type;
    /* Name of the file/directory (null-terminated) */
    char *rn_name;
    /* Length of the name, not including the terminator */
    size_t rn_namelen;
    /* Size of the file */
    size_t rn_size;
    /* Buffer to the file data */
    char *rn_buf;
    /* Size of the allocated buffer */
    size_t rn_bufsize;
    /* Last change time */
    struct timespec rn_ctime;
    /* Last access time */
    struct timespec rn_atime;
    /* Last modification time */
    struct timespec rn_mtime;
    /* Node access mode */
    int rn_mode;
    /* Whether or not the rn_buf was allocated in this ramfs_node */
    bool rn_owns_buf;
};
```

> This structure contains the file type (which can be a regular file - `VREG`, a symbolic link - `VLNK`, or a directory - `VDIR`), the buffer in which the data will be stored, and its size.

Reviewer 2: Is this the `rn_type` field? If so, explicitly state that.

> A field that normally should not be here is the name, but for the simplicity of the library, it is used.
> Unfortunately, the fact that the name field is here and is used in the code does not allow the creation of hard links.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Typically an inode-like structure (such as `ramfs_node`) doesn't store the filename;
the filename is typically stored in a dentry-line structure, allowing for the creation of hard links.
For simplicity, the `RamFS` library stores the filename as the `rn_name` and `rn_namelen` fields in the `ramfs_node` structure;
consequently, this means that hard link are not available on `RamFS`.
```

## Configuring Applications to Use `RamFS`

> We have the following simple app that we run using a `RamFS` filesystem:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A Unikraft application that uses the `RamFS` filesystem will use code snippets such as the one below:
```

> ```c

Reviewer 2: Make this complete. Dump the entire `main.c` file, with `#include` statements and the `main()` function that contains the snippet below.

char buf[1024];

> int f = open("test1.txt", O_RDWR | O_CREAT, 0777);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
int fd = open("test1.txt", O_RDWR | O_CREAT, 0777);
```

> int f = open("test1.txt", O_RDWR | O_CREAT, 0777);

Reviewer 2: Use a less boring name for the file. Use something like `atlantis.txt` or `westeros.txt` or `server.conf`. And also the message could be something different than `TEST`.

> write(f, "TEST", 4);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
write(fd, "TEST", 4);
```

> close(f);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
close(fd);
```

> f = open("test1.txt", O_RDONLY);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
fd = open("test1.txt", O_RDONLY);
```

> read(f, buf, 4);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
read(fd, buf, 4);
```

printf("%s\n", buf);
```

All the files for `RamFS` are created in the memory of the application, therefore they exist only for the duration of the program.

> Moreover, this means that we cannot use existing files from outside the application (e.g. files from the host's filesystem).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Moreover, this means that we cannot use existing files from outside the application (e.g. files from the host filesystem).
```

> This is why we have to create the files we want to use inside the application (in our case, `test1.txt`), and we do this by giving the `O_CREAT` flag to the `read` function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is why we have to create the files we want to use inside the application.
In the snippet above we used the `O_CREAT` file to the `open()` function to create the file named `test1.txt`.
```

> To configure the application to run under `RamFS` we have to do the following steps:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To configure the application to run under `RamFS` we follow the steps below:
```

> 1.  Enter the configuration interface by running:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1.  Enter the configuration interface by running:

```

> ```console

Reviewer 2: Indent 3 spaces.

   $ make menuconfig
   ```

> 2.  Select `vfscore:` `VFS Core Interface`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

1. Select `vfscore:` `VFS Core Interface`.
```

Author: This was the way I previously wrote this, but the Codacy check failed, saying that I should use 2 instead of 1. The same applies to all the other ordered items from below.

Reviewer: Ignore codacy on this one, use `1.` for all of them and a single space after that.

> 3.  Select `vfscore: Configuration  --->`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

1. Select `vfscore: Configuration  --->`.
```

> 4.  Select `Automatically mount a root filesystem (/)`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

1. Select `Automatically mount a root filesystem (/)`.
```

> 5.  Select `Default root filesystem`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Select `Default root filesystem`.
```

> 6.  Select `RamFS`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

1. Select `RamFS`.
```

> The output of the program presented above is the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Building and the running the program above yields the output below:

```

```console
SeaBIOS (version 1.15.0-1)
Booting from ROM...
Powered by
o.   .o       _ _               __ _
Oo   Oo  ___ (_) | __ __  __ _ ' _) :_
oO   oO ' _ `| | |/ /  _)' _` | |_|  _)
oOo oOO| | | | |   (| | | (_) |  _) :_
 OoOoO ._, ._:_:_,\_._,  .__,_:_, \___)
          Phoebe 0.10.0~9bf6e633-custom
TEST
Arguments:  "build/app-helloworld_kvm-x86_64" "console=ttyS0"
Console terminated, terminating guest (PID: 9898)...

> ```

Reviewer 2: Add an explanation of the output, the printing of the `TEST` content of the `test1.txt` file.
